Hello and welcome to the swift community podcast.
I'm your host, Angela Tikhon. I'm an incoming first year phD student in computer science at the university. Chicago. I'm inspiring compiler and or programming language. Nerd. Our first host is none other than Chris Latner. The initial developed where Swift.
Andrew, Thank you for inviting me to join you. And thanks for putting this all together. Thank you
for coming to join us. Our second hostess. Serious estrogen. See ashes. And I was engineer at the at business as well as a swift open source. Contributor C s still don't tell us a little about your background.
Hey, guys, Thanks for having me. Um, yeah. Um I work at an Irish engineer at an agency in London. Um, and I also regularly contribute to sift
cool. Um, so
as you might have realized what? The way we're talking about it, today's topic is it might end up being a little bit more technical because we aren't talking so much about how people use Swift with more about how someone can contribute to the development of the compiler for swift.
Um, so I when so I pitched up. I am kind of outside this swift community and like I don't I'm still learning Swift, But I'm really interested in compilers and probably languages. And since compile Swift is a generally knew probably language, it's really interesting opportunity for me to try and get involved in
the development of this language in a way in a way that you can't really for the more set in stone programming languages.
So, Andrew, what what drives you and interesting about compilers and programming languages? And how did you get interested in this area?
I mean so honestly, im
basically, people tell you, like source that, like C code or python, it basically is the language of computer. And when you were computer science students, you realize very quickly that that's not really true because you have a compliant. You have this tool that's conscious treat as a black box to turn stump to turn the code. You're the code that is a language that computer speaks into
actual machine code.
And so I was really interested in, like
learning what the details of that sort of
mechanism. And then Chris was on an episode of 80 p a couple of years, I think two years ago, and that's kind of when I realised compiler for something you could kind of do and actively being developed.
Yeah, it's also really interesting the programming language side of things where
you're kind of designing a world for other programmers, which is kind of, you know, more, a softer. It's kind of squishy. There's a lot of people who say it's just bike shedding, but it's actually really hard. There's a lot of really interesting and difficult engineering trade offs and pros and cons, And,
um, it's ah, also a very fascinating art in itself.
I definitely agree. Like, that's actually what I'm planning to go to
graduate school for, because I'm really interesting. Like how you can make a good programming languages for, like, the's new, like high performance computing, really quantum computing abstractions that we're trying to create now,
Yeah, I'll be really cool. So, yes. How did you get involved originally in this with project and what got you interested in the compiler language space?
Um, yes,
I have. I've learned a lot about compilers during my computer science degree. Um, but I
I've never actually made one myself. Um and quite really enjoy working on Ah, like low level stuff and like tearing things apart, seeing how it works.
So, um, so when I started learning surfed, um, I want to learn more about
how it works internally. Um, so a couple of months ago, I
I just started looking at how Softworks and
rented a safe depository, and that kind of
motivated me do,
um, start contributing.
That's that's really interesting, cause I don't I feel like that's such a high barrier like inside hybrid and hybrid entry. That's obviously it's just out there, but I think it's really interesting. They were able to just sort of
get into it by just looking at the, um basically
what's been put out there already.
It is a perfect coast for this episode because this episode is all about how to get involved, how to get started, had to contribute to the compiler. So that's perfect. All
right, so I guess if the to get into it, I think the perfect place to start is sort about like just the structure of Swift and the sort of the Swiss project and compiler from the high level. So,
um, Chris is the one that, like, started everything is
you Could you give us the basic The high level rundown of what Swift looks like? Sure.
So swift is very similar in spirit. Too many other compilers and, um, the I and many of the other people that put together and build swift. Um, I spent a lot of time working on the claim. Compiler playing is a compiler for C C plus plus an objective C um, this part of L. V. Um, and so we took a lot of the experiences we had building playing and what worked and what didn't work and,
uh, kind of learned from them, but also adapted them to the different language that Swift is
so typically a programming language or front end like Swift
has several different phases within it. And the way I explain compilers in general is that you have a front end and then you have an optimizer, and then you have a code generator on the front end is swift. It's what's the syntax? The way the language works, the rules, you know, the type system, um, the syntax of variable declarations. You know, Do you have four lips or do you have wild lives? Things like that. Do you have semicolons or not? These curly braces or not All that kind of stuff is all in the front end.
The optimizer is in. Swift's case is covered by the same called L V M L V M is a very mature optimization framework, and it also includes the co generator. And so, if you go to a specific you know, Mac, that is running an intel x 86 chip or you have an iPhone that's running an arm chip or you have, you know, a supercomputer that's running some completely crazy. Awesome chip. Um, the code generator handles that for you. So today we're gonna focus on Swift and the front end part of that compiler and dive into what that takes.
So most most front ends are broken into a few different pieces. So if you kind of like zoom in on just the front end part of the compiler,
um, the first thing that you encounter is saying the thing called organization or sometimes called flexing and token ization, is where the individual source files. So you have no food out swift. You remained out swift in your project. Um,
the first step is for the compiler to like break it up in the units that it can analyze. This is these are called tokens and
this is the part that says Ah ha F O. R is a key word. And it's, you know, especially has special behavior and slash slash starts to comment, and we'll just ignore that completely. And, um, you know, uh, curly braces are magic. And when you have strings or multi line strings, here's how you represent them in a source file and on Swift this there's this is actually more complicated in some cases than other languages because you have things like
Unicode identifiers, for example, so you can use the dog. Cow is a variable name and Unicode operators and Swift makes different. There's a difference between identify IRS and operators and all that kind of stuff is known in the lecture of the organizer.
Um, I don't know if either of you have worked on the CIA. Shove you touched the Lexx er, part of the compiler. It'll
I have ah half of a fixed a few bucks, um, in the power set. Uh, yeah.
Okay. You can talk about what? What pieces you've touched her What you've seen,
um, but mostly worked on diagnostics. So, um, just adding new deck No. Six. Uh,
he tells about that. I mean, what what? Our diagnostics, first of all, And why were they missing?
Um, sure. Um, diagnostics are,
and it's just like an error message or a warning that the compiler could emit. Do you tell the user what went wrong?
Um, and I was working on a p r for tribal accesses, and I had to, um, like, modify the powers up it do, except rose in ghettos and status and do emit a different diagnostic if
if it wasn't not in the correct position.
Um, so, yeah, that's that's what I walked. Um, yeah,
yeah. And so the nice thing about working at this part of the compilers, it's really it's relatively simple. It maps like if you know, Swift as a programmer, this is relatively easy to understand.
Kind of. The next step is this purser phase, and the purser's what takes the tokens and
looks across them and tries to understand the sentences that make up your swift, swift program. And Swift has a couple of different different parts of its syntax and
the way that programming languages reason about this is they have a thing called a grammar, just like English has. A grammar or other spoken languages have grammars where you have now and verbs, adjectives those kinds of things.
Swift has its own grammar, and the grammar is structured around things like expressions and statements and types
patterns, things like that. And so each of these different units of the swift language each have thought a little grammar that describes them. And then it's the person's job to check to make sure that the input source code matches the expected grammar of swift. And if it doesn't match up in you, you spell your variable declaration without a colon, for example, the parcel has to notice that it has to output a diagnostic like See Ya, she's talking about. And then, if Thea if, if it's correct minute that it puts it in what's called a purse tree.
Now this generating a diagnostic is really hard because you generate an error from the purser when the source code is incorrect.
And so
if the code is correct, then it follows the speck of what Swift is supposed to be. But if it's incorrect,
well, you can't have to guess what the human meant.
And this is actually really hard because humans make all kinds of different mistakes. And so this is this is very challenging. Did did you encounter this?
I have, like, worked on compiler
compiling for a class project, and that was definitely a big part of the problem where the professor actually had us try to make some sort of smart air messages. And the ability to actually get that to work correctly was particularly difficult. Just because
I mean, an air can be anything from just something being misspelled toe, like a total breakdown of the structure of the code.
Yeah, absolutely. And this is where it's actually kind of interesting when you get to,
uh, we started thinking about language designed. You think about the different pieces,
the different constraints that were put on the problem. So on the one hand, you want syntax that feels understandable and is easy to read. And programmers like to write and things like that, um, some there's different philosophies in this. Obviously,
some people go for, like, the absolute minimal syntax. What are the fewest characters you have to type in to be able to represent certain amount of code.
But it turns out that you want a little bit of redundancy in the language itself, because with that redundancy, it makes it much easier to recover from errors. And so one of the things that's good about rather that's convenient, I guess about see, for example, is it require semicolons between statements. And so if you completely mess up one line of C code, well, the person can say, OK, I've lost track What's going on out? Put a generic air,
then skip ahead until it gets to a semicolon. And because semicolons exists and they're like this clean spot that separates all the different statements.
You know, the pressure can kind of re synchronize with code and understand what's going on and then keep going and try and produce other air messages
and languages like Swift make that a little bit more challenging because they don't have that synchronization point
now. So if can still go to curly braces and there's lots of tricks that are still good, you know, because started a keyword like Farrah funk or things like that.
But these aspects of language designed they're not not really obvious,
but really matter when it comes to these air experience in the quality of working with the languages programmer,
um, so have either of you and counterparts trees. And, uh, anybody want to explain what upholstery is?
Um yeah, so apart. Street is basically once you've gone through the parsing for the ah,
of the language itself, you basically have. You've basically what you do when you when you go through that process is that you create a a bunch of different structures that point to the other structures in such a way that you say this. This particular section of the code is a four loop, and it has, like it has tthe e like the initial ah,
The initial condition has the the the condition that happens at the end of the loop and has the body of the loop itself. And so
those are basically those air strung together and in a tree like structure, so that way for the rest of the program, for the rest of the rest of the compiler can go through and
read and ah,
get the information it needs to do tight checking or the co generation that needs to happen. Leader.
Yeah,
that's exactly right. And so when I first encountered compilers, I was really kind of mystified, actually about the purse tree because it misfired and also very interested because I learned about trees and a data structures class. And the trees I encountered were things like binary trees and be trees and things like that. And the I had always thought that a tree had to have each node was like an instance of the same class. And so you have, like
like, tree node, and then you have a tree node points the other tree knows points, other tree knows points the other train.
And so one of the the interesting things to me about post reasons they actually end up being these header genius trees.
And so what you end up with is you end up with
a function declaration node on a function declaration note has a pointer to all of the parameters and the signature for the function, for example, and then the body is a list of statements and statements are a completely different type of node. And maybe you have ah four statement underneath your function. Declaration in the four statement has two children. One is tthe e pattern or the variables that you're declaring. And one is the sequence that the four statement is looping over. And then it has another pointer to the body, which is another statement. And so you end up with these interesting situations where there's actually different classes within the compiler represent different concepts. Thank you know there's a class Cherokee, the represents types. There's a class hierarchy that represents
statements. There's a class area that represents expressions. There's a classic reefer patterns. There's, you know, each of these air different, different, different things. And then you end up with this, like really cool header genius tree that you can
represent the program as it's written, but in a structured form. And Swift has various commandment flags that you can pass like
if you run swift, see, you can pass the dash par stash S T flag, and what that will do is that will read in your swift code and then, uh, produced this purse tree and then dump it out to stand it out. And so then you can take a look at the parts tree and you can actually see how the compilers seeing your code. And so if you're
it is actually really cool thing to Dio used, I use it for with the L O V m with a clang flags for see? It's actually really cool thing to see how it really help you put together how everything is structured inside the program.
Yeah, and so what you'll see is you'll see things like a note for a four statement, for example. And then what you can do is you know, if you're interested in contributing compiler, what you could do is you can jump into the
include swift s t statement dot h or something like that
header file and you'll see the declaration of the class for four statement and you can go look at it and you can see OK, four. Statement has all these different fields and then you can look at the dump of the S T and you can see
those fields as they like exists in the dump. But then how they map into the actual data structure. This is a really super important way to kind of like look, one level deeper into the compiler and try to understand how it is representing the code. And this is this is a great way to get ideas of how how different situations and swift get handled by the compiler. And so you just like, right, lots of weird test cases and lots of weird examples to see how it does different things
s o the next phase. There's a couple of other phases that the compiler goes through. There's this thing called name binding or name. Look up. And so, um, one of the funny things about Swift is that you can define your own operators, right? And so, you know, plus is not a magically built in thing of the language. And so when you go to purse, you know, a plus B times C
the swift compiler starts out by not knowing anything about plus or times just knows their operators. And so when it purses that it can't actually decide which is higher priority or higher precedence than the other one. And so it parses
Ah, a plus b times C together into a flat list.
And then what it ends up doing is a single name. Look up. And what name look up, does it says Okay, I have
five things I have a I have Plus, I have B C. I have times like these air these air names and then it applies rules to find out. Okay, Who declared a Who declared, Plus, who declared. See, what are those things? And so it uses a series of rules to like look in the current scope to see like is a local variable if it's not a local variable is a, uh, an instance variable. If it's not inscrutable, is it? Is that a subclass, for example, or is it a global variable? Or did it get imported from some module or swift has a series of rules for this.
Likewise, with operators, it has to go say Okay, well, there has to be an operator declaration for plus, and once it goes and finds that it can now, no. Oh, well, plus has this precedence, and times has this precedence, and they're late in this way and therefore
times has a higher, higher binding strength, and then plus does and so it can actually form the the purse tree in the way you'd expect for an expression.
The final phase of the type Hector is the front end piece that's dealing with trees is called type checking and so tight checking them goes and says, Okay, I found a and I found Be on
It Turns out that a Plus B was written in the code.
Well is written as an end. B was written as a float. Is there any plus that takes an intern afloat?
And this part of the compiler is quite complicated because there's a lot of different rules. Usually it's not a simple of saying I found the exact match. Usually you enter into the world of generics and other other things like that. And there's a bunch of complicated rules for resolving protocol matches and which binds tighter and things like this.
So, yeah, I think you've worked in this part of the compiler.
Do you have any advice or guidance or what Have you been experiencing venue experience and you have any helpful tips of how to get involved in this piece?
Um, yeah, of up both of the bucks of fix for in the type checker on Dhe. I think it's quite complex. I still struggle with some areas off say Constrained generation and the whole constraint system Bet
honestly, I wanted to like every time I touch it, I have to, like, dig and like, write a bunch of test cases and set breakpoints and try and understand what it's doing.
Um, yeah, There's a great document on the surf trip Auditory school type checkered at rst. Um, and that kind of gives you a really high level overview off how these constraints is supposed to work. Like I found it quite helpful because I knew nothing about a constraint system before,
Um, he had that's like, That's a good place to start if you wanna learn about how type inference works.
Yeah, this is This is one of the places where the swift language is very different than the sea language, for example. And this is one of things that I had to learn all about from other people when when we started building this swift compiler and, um,
in a C C language of symbols plus language. Generally, the way it works is you say type, check the leaves of the trees, and so if you have a plus B, you type check a
a tape deck B and then you type check plus. And if it works, you're good. And if it doesn't work,
you bail out and produce an heir message. Well, swift. You have type inference. And so it turns out that you can have types that flow by directionally across the expression so you could have one plus two right and one doesn't have a prescribed type. Necessarily. It will default to end, and then it may have a contextual type of in 16. And because it's in 16 or because it's float,
the type of one gets affected by the context it's in. And so there's a thing called the constraints All over that goes and builds,
builds all the constraints of the syntax as it is written, and then tries to find a solution to.
Is there a way to label all the things and the expression tree with types that are compatible and are correct
and swift? Nix is complicated, exist generics and protocols and overloading, and you know all these things and they all work together.
Yeah, that's a great dog by someone who works on left. His name is Robert Wittman, I believe, um, and he I think He gave a talk on the swift type system, and it's a lot. There's a lot of math in it,
but I think it's a great dog to learn more about. How's this
type? System works.
It
would be great if we could add a link to the show. Notes to that talk
Slava Slava is another course with contributor that has written several good documents about the swift generic system, and that's also a really a really great place to look as well.
So once, once the compiler then takes the type the syntax tree and does full type checking
if it finds that everything in your program is correct
and then goes on to generating code for L. A V M to use, and it does this for a couple of steps, one is called
Sil Jen. So Sil Jen is a phase that turns the syntax tree into a code representation known a sill
still is, uh, what's knows the swift, intermediate language. It's It's a compiler representation for your code. We probably shouldn't dive too deep into that today, but maybe a different time.
Still, Jen and the civil code is used for high level optimization zits used for things like generic specialization. It's used for reference count organizations. It's used for
certain parts of the checking to make sure that you don't
like, redefined the let variable more than once things like that, Um, and then the silk coat is eventually converted to what L Of'em wants through this thing called I Arjun. And
each of these phases you can think of the compilers being a pipeline. And so if any of the phases before it produces an heir message from the compiler will stop, and it doesn't go on to the next phase. And so this is the General Hae little view of the different parts of the compiler. And if you get involved in the and you want to contribute to the compiler, there's a tremendous number of different problems at each one of these places. And each of the subsystems are
fascinating and complicated and different and
in different ways. And so there's a lot of different stuff going on. But it's, ah, pretty fun to see how the pieces fit together.
One of the last things I'll put a plug for is testing, so testing in a compiler is super super super important because you want to compiler to always be correct. And likewise compilers air big and complicated chunks of code. And so, um,
as bugs were found as any complicated software project, you'll have bugs. You want to write test cases to fix it. And so the Swift compiler and Swift project has a bunch of infrastructure for making it really easy to write tests. And if you go into the swift, compile a depository into the test. Subdirectory, we'll see is you'll see individual directories for each of the different pieces of the compiler. So there's like a test slash purser subdirectory or test less Sil jen. And what you'll see is that each of the files is written and sometimes as dots with files like these tiny little dust with files. And you'll see,
for example, for the personal checks.
A lot of examples of invalid swift code and you'll see that the tests are checking that not only does the invalid code get detected, but that the compilers producing the expected air message. And so this is what allows the comparative uppers to make sure that you know, as they're changing the person as they're changing the here six years to identify what mother thinks. You probably meant that it, you know, the it always gets better and better and better. And we don't get regressions And the quality of a pilot.
Um, it's so like when people
make pee ours for ah,
and poor requesting the contributions, like,
are there are they expected to write test to, um, to supplement that put poor request, or they do. They generally are they are Is that a separate polar quest that they make? Or
it sounds like from what you're talking about, testing that those should probably those probably go hand in hand in some
way. Yeah. What is your was your experience, men? See,
um, it sort of depends on what you kink. Sometimes you have these NFC on. No functionality can be ours. Um, and in that case, you probably don't write any tests unless unless something exchanged. Um, And, uh,
if if you fixing a bark or like adding a new feature, then yeah, you do have to act up and yeah,
yeah. So this community really values than this idea of incremental development.
You know, any time you've worked on a project with other people. You know, you'll encounter the situation where somebody goes off in a corner and works on something really, really, really hard. Then they come back and there they say, Wow, I made this patch. It's 5000 lines kind land this
right? And so, um, the problem with that is it makes it very difficult to review the code. And, you know, if you took your like, Oh, I made this, like, very simple changed. But I reform had the entire file at the same time.
Then it's very difficult to see the force of the trees and actually change that matters versus all the reformatting things. And so because of that, S E. R. Says
there's a lot of re factoring changes that often happen. And so you'll see when somebody wants to make a big change,
they go and re factor a factor effect for a factor. And then
the big changes kind of drops in because everything is ready. The architecture, the compiler is there, and it just fits. And so this is where you get these, these quote unquote NFC changes where, like you're factoring it, you're not trying. You're intentionally not changing the behavior of the compiler. It shouldn't be like user visible, but you're moving the architecture in place. Such the future changes that happened can be easier and easier to to review, but also that they fit with the new design that you're pushing towards.
And so the swift community and generally compiler communities are pretty hardcore about testing and a time you add new feature. You fix about to do things like that. You're generally required to include a test case right with the PR.
All right,
um so
I think now that we've kind of gone over like what,
like different parts of swiftly could work on the compiler that you could work on, which are
wide and varied, I think which probably move into, like where exactly the development community exists. And obviously there's a get hope depository and there's a lot of different places, but and there's a swift up the stairs, the Swiss website. But
from what I'm able to see, I have I've sort of looked at ah
joining us of community before, like there's there's this a form to see the Swift Gear Issue tracker and I also hear the podcast. But, um,
these are really big. And, um, I think I think it's not able to look at, like, kind of where the best place to, like enter this community, as I know. See us. You mentioned that you kind of went to the depository and started looking at what was there. So you want to talk about a little bit About where development communities the like, the most fervent or the most exciting place to work. Exciting place to visit, to see about what you can do?
Um, sure. Uh, what sort of dependent what you're looking for. I think, um, I love tea. A lot of discussion takes place in the sweet forums on Deacon.
If you go to some forms, he could always find
huh alike. Boast about new features are like proposals and stuff. Um, if you could If you dont dressing in fixing box, I think the swift year has brought out the best place. Um uh, find East bucks to fix.
And I think the way with the way we look it is that the swift community and swift compiler just just look to compile herself.
There's
e I mean, many dozens of people to contribute toe probably maybe even hundreds.
And so this is an incredibly social exercise because you have all these different people, different phases in their life, different priorities. They're like bumping up against each other through good reviews. And it's, you know, it's a very organic kind of a process.
You know, you have teams of people where there's two or three people working together on a specific project together sometimes, but generally with open source like you kind of have to plan for the uncoordinated coordinated, and then you take coordination for grant for grand when you get it. And so, um,
you know the website, for example, is really about being the front door for the project and helping people understand what Swift is. This is, really
I mean, I would love to see the website be improved, but the website is really kind of best for getting people who don't know very much about Swift to be in the door and ideally preventing a few like hot links for
people that were contributing to it so they can get to where they're going quickly.
The bug tractor is super important. This is where
you get obviously bugs filed, but also feature requests and a lot of other things, and this is kind of going to the reality that not everybody can fix everything. And not everything is the highest priority. And so having a a place to go where you can keep track of all the work that could or should or needs toe happen in a way that could be prioritized and triage and tracked and stuff like that, it's really important,
Um,
and the community and the even. The project itself is not just about code, though. And,
you know, we have get Hub, which is really great for saying like Here is a specific change. I wanna land, Can somebody review it? And that's that's great and that's really important. And then it could be merged into the compiler. But also again, given this is such an incredibly social kind of project and, you know, world,
the forms are really important. And to me, I think the forms were really the first place I would go. If you're interested in contributing to Swift,
I wouldn't go to the swift evolution for him. Actually, that's not the place I would personally start, although it could be really interesting in its own right. I would I would look at this with Dev Forum, like the developer form where you have people that are actively working on the compiler and asking each other. Hey, I wanna make this change.
I've never touched this part of the code before.
What do I do? What?
We walk. Watch out. For what? What? Booby traps exist. And, um, I don't know if you've had a look on that form. See, Usher what your experiences have been,
um, I've made it both ones about tribal access. Er's
so so there was a both and sift evolution not getting many years ago.
Um, and one of these 50 goatee members, John McCall,
He hit me. He replied, tread saying that if anyone interested in actually implementing this featured and he would be quite happy to, uh, mentor, um so I was like, Hey, I would be really happy to, uh, actually drive this feature forward. So ended up creating a tread on a swift death
for him. And,
uh, yeah, I got a lot of help from John McCall and Slava and other people.
Um, yeah, it's definitely great place to start if you want to land a new feature on left or if you're just looking for what's going on.
Yeah, I think that story is remarkable, and I think it's pretty typical hopefully because,
um, just so you know, like John is one of the like, the earliest members of Swift compiler team at Apple.
He like he was like the second or third person to join the team, and he's now a core team member. He's super smart, super senior. He knows, like everything about all the parts of the stack. I go to him for advice, kind of a thing.
Slop is like this very awesome hardcore engineer who loves code beauty and wants everything to be right. And he's been an apple for a number of years. And again, the fact that the swift, swift compiler community in general even not just like a pilot, but this with comedian generalised so like, welcoming and helpful. Um, this is This is why I think that the forms a really good place, and if you're not interested in diving in quite yet, it's also good to just lurk and just follow what other people are talking about. And when you see an interesting discussion, Mike, Click through the code and see what they're working on and see how it works and kind of try to understand the trade offs and stuff like that. And just following along could be a really great way toe. Understand what is happening and the ebb and the flow of the project.
Many, many, many, many years ago, sadly, but many, many years ago, when I first was working on L. V. M. I was following the GCC project and I was interested in contributing GCC as well. But I just followed, like every patch that went GCC for a couple of years while I was working on other things, and it gave me a very good sense of just how the project worked and what Pete, what problems People found interesting and you know what was happening. And I wasn't working on GCC or anything like that. But it was just a good way to understand, you know, the personalities involved in what they cared about and things like that, and given the development is such a social kind of activity, it's it's really good to make those connections and understand it from that perspective
outside the forum. There's a bunch of different places that are really important. So this podcast is great with way for somebody to get involved. I don't know, Andrew, if you agree of that or if this has worked out for you, huh?
I mean, this has definitely been a bit of a trial by fire for me. I think it's definitely giving me the
pushing the realization that
even like even though you're like, you feel like when you're outside the commute like there's no way
you feel like you can't quite get into because it feels like everyone involved already has so much more experience than you like. It doesn't hurt to just give it a shot like,
uh in this for this podcast, like, I've done a little bit of sort of podcast work on before, but there's definitely a really new experience to me and like talking about the Swift and this compilers also very new to me. And I think,
uh, if you I think it seems like it, really, it's just kind of go for it. It seems like something the
anyone can really do if they put their mind to it like I'm definitely in that lurking stage in the forums right now. And I can really see how that is helpful to really learning the philosophy of the projects in really how you can
be helpful
to the project itself.
Yeah, and then there's other ways get involved, too, because it's also not just about code
in person meet ups and very cities or super awesome because you can talk to other people and you can ask people in person like what they're working on and, you know, ask for help and things like that.
Conferences and events are also really great because you get to meet people and often go to interesting talks and things like that. So there's lots of different things. And this community is, uh,
huge and crazy and, like, lots of lots of stuff is always going on. I mean, one of the things that I have trouble with this keeping track of what is going on and sometimes, um and you do either of you have any advice for that
thinks platforms and is definitely good graces.
You learn more about what's going on, but I've found that, um, Twitter is also a great place to learn more about, um, some of the new stuff that's going on. A lot of people share love to eat
that Do trust that you might not know what I have a hard time finding on the soot forms because to get, you know, buried deep somewhere.
Um, yeah.
I've
seen a lot about the, uh like Like the new developments and swift like first of five from, like John Sandal running blood posts about it and also, like, swift for machine learning by falling Chris himself. So
I think there's, I think I agree with you also like,
um, that Twitter seems a really good resource for just following the m and flow of the new developments
and Swift. Yeah, it's this funny thing where people like to talk about the stuff they're working on. They get very excited about it. And Andi, like the community in general, is so broad and so diverse in the interest in projects. And, like, I don't do anything on windows, for example. But I love seeing all the cool developments there happening on Swift on windows and things like that. It's like amazingly fast progress from my perspective. And even though I don't really use Windows. I think it's amazing to see that kind of stuff. So it's a great way to keep track of things.
And so I guess the last thing that ends up happening in the cycle of the compiler is that you end up getting a release of it. And so, you know, sweet five is, uh, now with us.
But each each of the different releases, the swift come together in their own kind of chaotic way. Uh uh. Do either of you wanna talk about that? And where what happens with releases and how that kind of process works at a high level
show. So basically, Ah, Venice lift team decides A are announcing the new version of surf. They would create a new branch from the master brunch on the branches, basically named after whatever sport version iss on dhe. Periodically, they would march new changes from master into that brunch. Um, and then each leaf swift release also has a cut off date, after which they stopped at this automatic merging from master. Um, so that's when I
if you're creating a new PR and submitting it to master, you would also have two great. Another PR. Do somebody do that brunch? Um,
and the idea. The idea behind that is that what we want?
Lots of progress and lots of exciting new things coming in and lots of bug fixes and stuff like that. Every new patches that comes in includes a little bit of risk with it because it could introduce a new bug or new compile time, slow down or things like that. And so as the release starts winding down, um, that cutoff date is a kind of a forcing function for stability, where now there's this new barrier that's added to get changes into the release. And so, by making a specific poor request to get into the release, it just makes it a little bit harder. And there's a little bit more review of what goes in.
I'm good. Either You have any insight to Just, I guess, is a lot of time, but like how? That Ah,
But how that decision is made like who is involved in making a decision like we want this release to include these features and like these, these ones are okay if they don't get included, stuff like that.
Oh, yeah. that's that's, like super hard, because with with an open source project, you have this problem of,
you know, you don't control anybody,
right? And so I can't like, um, like Andrew says, it's a I'm gonna like, totally do this thing. This would be a great future for the next release. And then he gets busy with finals, and then it doesn't happen, right? Or oh, are you know, the flip side of it is that out of nowhere, Andrew's like,
Hey, I got
this awesome new feature like
like, here's the patch or just influence all the stuff people wanted for years. Boom. Now you have it. It's like, Whoa, okay, that's cool.
And so you don't really have ah, you know, with an open source project, you can't really
control that very well. Um, and so there's certain cases where Apple, for example, can manage their engineers. They could decide what to prioritize and do like things like that. But generally the swift releases end up being time based. And so it's whatever gets in before that cut off date gets in. And if it misses that date, then well, that will always be another release
right and okay, that kind of approach has worked out really well. Um, and that way, you know, suffer estimation is also hard. So it's hard to predict How long will it take to do anything? And, you know, you may say, like, I really want to get the sentence with five. But if it doesn't work well, if I don't want to be around the corner and it's more important for there to be continual progress and all the other features in improvements getting out than any one individual change.
All right, well,
so now that we know that we've kind of gone over like where the community is and where you like, where you could go where you could go, like to find your first issue, or like
or like to find what people are talking about. Like,
I think a big part of a big, really hard part for a lot of people is finding that first project to work on the first issue and like getting over that hurdle of finding something to d'oh. So
can you walk us through like, maybe what? Your first contribution, Waas or and how you kind of went about finding finding your first problem to work on?
Um, yeah, sure. Um, so
I didn't know where to start. Basically, um,
as I mentioned before, I have are spending a lot of time in sweet forums.
And I think I was reading a post on ah, thinks something, really, but sub scripts on a raise like safe sub script. And someone actually mentioned a ah linked ajira, which is the first time I discovered that there was a juror for theft, Um, and s o a vintage era. And I started looking at recent bucks, but they weren't gonna sleep really hard. I I have no work. You work in a compiler before, so I had no idea where to. Actually, Richard backtracked effects because
don't look really hot. Um, but as I kept scrolling and scrolling, I found this buck, which was labeled as a starter park. So I selected data so older started box, and I
came to realize that I think those having these are the parks are meant for people who knew deception.
Um, so the first book I fixed waas and
in before 75.1 b, you couldn't have a key part Refering to a triple.
It would just give you an incorrect diagnostic saying that it can't find a dupe element
in in the dew pill. Um, so So So that bug was Yes. You fixed the diagnostic and say something more specific, right? Like a key part. Support for two pills haven't being implemented yet.
Um, so So I checked out the source code. Um, and I spend like a week trying to figure out where to actually fix it. I knew at a high level where all these different parts what these different parts of the compile it does. But that doesn't like tens of thousands of line to go to you like that. You have to go true sometimes. And do you understand where the right places to fix it?
Um, so, yeah, I spent like every trying to write deadlines, of course, just to just to fix it. Um, And then I create a PR, and I was expecting a lot of comments, actually, because it was my first BR, but surprisingly, only got one comment about indentation,
um and yes, a fixed indentation. And that got approved on that. That was my first contribution. Even that was really simple fact, did they take a lot of time?
Just you going to the source code?
Do you have any tips for how you slug through so much code? And we ended up working. And how you end up finding that, like, simple 10 line fix in the middle of this giant massive stuff?
Um, uh, it's it's funny, because I I just did a hard thing. I just I actually read the code,
um, and just I, um
basically, yeah, I spent a lot. Yeah, I spent a lot of time just going to the code. Um, yeah, it was really hard, but I also went back and looked at some other much be ours related to diagnostics. And that kind of ah gave me some hints as to what do what? Every kink.
For example, I learned where where does the actual diagnostic text goes? It's It's a different Dottie fr um
um and I was I was more thinking like thinking that it's kind of hard coded somewhere in the compartment, but it's all quite nicely organized. Um, yeah, it is just better off, like actually reading the coat on and just looking at related ers. Ah, you can figure out where how to do this.
Um,
yeah, that that that's a great approach. I mean, the if you can find other bug fixes or other changes there nearby, Um, that's a great way to figure out what
What files get touched, where all the different moving parts. Things like that. Another exam. Another good thing you can do is if you know roughly where the coat is. You can write a test case like the smallest possible chunk of swift code that shows the issue and then set breakpoints in the compiler and see you know what parts of the compiler get run different places.
There's a bunch of helper tools like the dash par stash S t flag ally to dump out the S T. So you can see what is the code look like? And there's other flags for other other phases to dump out the code at different points.
And you can also ask for help on the different to that
good way to go.
Yeah, I I also learned that you could also just copy basically diagnostic into the intellect like extradite search bar, and you can find where exactly it's located and
and then you could figure out what the
did. The idea for you like did that diagnostic is, and then you could find where winter coat it's being emitted.
Yeah, that's that's a great point because one of the best places to get started with the compiler is if you see their messages. That's weird. Um,
some men are messages. They're hard to improve, but other ones are relatively low hanging fruit, and the starter bugs you mentioned are a good, good way to tell. And if you see an error message, that's not great. You search for it and find out what code is being is admitting it and then set a break point there and kind of step through the code that's nearby. That could be a good way to get an anchor into the the big code base to know what is going on.
Yeah, I'm also learned a few other commands that you could use death. One called, I think
dash deeper dash constraints or some something along the length of that
that could dump all the other constraints, the constraint system. And there's some really fancy craft Yuri stuff in it, Um, but at that has a helped me a lot as well when fixing some parks in the, uh, the constraint system.
All right. Um, so do you sort of mentioned earlier that there was a feature I can't
quite remember. What the
the ah, what? They were working. But you actually, you were basically we're
being mentored by someone. Like from this with four. Obviously, that's
Could you talk more about that? Like how you got that help fromthe sir Forms themselves. Yeah,
sure. Um, yes. So there was a post on generic sub scripts and tribal subscript back back in 2060. Um, and so you could have generic sub scripts now, but you can't have terrible sub scripts. So, um, I think someone at
I think the last reply was back into Indy's 16 itself. But someone like both said it replied to that. Tried asking if if it's being worked on or not. Um And then John replied, saying that he would be happy to help our mentor someone if they're interested in working on this feature.
Um, so I was like, Hey, yeah, I would be really happy to work on this feature, So he told me to get greater tread on the surf. Deaf, huh? Forums. And then he could just take it from there. So So I did that. I posted a few questions for him. Ast, you have very to start. Um, and yeah, I got some useful advice, and I just started working on it. Um, and then
a lot of people saw that tread and started liking it and commenting on it.
Um and yeah, I could have just walked on it on it for a while. I just got the pay six working, and I created a PR.
And I couldn't involve other people from 50 minute just to kind of review and suggested we can get the stuff. It's still work in progress. There's
There's a lot of stuff that needs to change in the compiler for that. Ah, for this feature to actually land. Um, but I'm
I'm not fully show. How do you actually do those changes? Um, some sort of like waiting for someone to actually
do that for me. Uh,
right. Yeah. It's kind of like stuck there, so Yeah, but I'm really hoping that I could land this pretty soon. I think something that people have been requesting for really long time. I think it's something that I would love to use in my own projects.
Um, yeah.
I
mean, it sounds like the forms, like,
really dynamic. And
how long was that process going on? Over. Look, I know you're still working on it, but
I mean, was it like, prettier, like continuous or like, sort of like, Was it broken over a long even? That for initial communication, was at over a long period of time. Or sort of
What did that interaction look like? I get it kind of touch. Time has made us a little more detail.
Um, yet it's bean of spin a few months now.
I think the people who work on safety, we're quite busy with their own workload. So it does take a lot of time sometimes to get some like a reply from them. So it's still back and forth conversation. That which is trying to figure out some of the changes that need. Do you happen before we could we could actually ah, landis feature. Um but I think it was great to see other people from
ah, the community like engaging with that compile a development dread
usually never seen, only usually see people who work on the compiler replied to that threat. But I think I think it's the future that Ah, a lot of people want. So it was good to see other people suggest other improvements we could make to this feature and stuff.
Um, yeah,
cool.
Um, it's really I think that's really I think that's really nice to hear that. That's just like the communication between the community, Um, so
kind of going from that, um where
where do you to the being inside the compiler community think that it's going in the future like,
um, what sort of things air we hope are you hoping to see from the community or sort of like,
Is there any excitement in the community that you're looking forward to it? Basically,
Yeah. I mean, I think there's a number of big language features that are, you know, important to land and important to make happen over time. Um, a lot of the engineering work and a lot of the thought in the community has been wrapped up around a B A stability and getting
library evolution and module stability and all this kind of stuff going, which has been kind of a big project for years now.
Um, I'm also really happy to see that the with that winding down, that there's other improvements
that allow more expressive codes of some of the dynamic features have been added to swift lately. For example, um,
the the Big Rocks, the boulders that need to land still are things like concurrency. So there's a proposal that's out. There's a big manifesto document that talks about one path forward for a concurrency and a single weight and things like that.
There's another big piece known as the ownership design, which allow much more low level control of memory access
and the current situation Swift is that memory memory management safe and you can drop down to unsafe pointer if reference counting is causing performance. But one of the nice things about the ownership designs that will allow you to go from safe, safe and elegant and simple code thio safe but more verbose and more typed code on. And but that provides more performance. And so this will provide another option for people where if you're writing high performance systems, library type of code, you can do that in the safe way without
without giving a performance and without giving up safety, which would be pretty cool.
And so there's a bunch of these kinds of projects that I think will happen over time. I'd also conceptually love to see preconditions and post conditions and have kind of
an idea of how that would end up working overtime without concrete design. There's tons and tons and tons of stuff that I think could be really exciting. And I think we, as a community have to be careful. Thio build at the language in a deliver it way, make sure all the pieces fit together really well. Make sure to take time and bake things
because it's better to have things come together in a really good way, even if it's slower than to try to rush things and try toe just like get tons and tons and tons of stuff and then find out it doesn't fit very well together.
It's better to be.
It's very far to take a long time, but be correct than to have it like have 1/2 baked out idea out there and have to have it have to change it over time and possibly have caused more problems that way.
Yeah,
exactly. So. I mean, the way I look it is that there's different, like rings of criticality on this, where the language itself is the most difficult to change if you get it wrong so you can change it. But it's very painful and very expensive to do that, because you have to, like, deprecate things and support them and phase them out and things like that, Um, the next level out is the standard library. So we want to stand library to be really, really, really, really right. But,
you know, if we get something wrong, well, we could just deprecate a method and add new one. And it can stay deprecate forever. And it would be fine,
you know, and that would be embarrassing. But it's not the end of the world, and the next level outer the higher level frameworks where you know somebody could make a database a p I. And like even if the database AP eyes completely wrong, well, something else could make a different database. A p A and it may be will eventually replace the 1st 1 and that's fine and then the next level out is like application code, where with the applications your
you know, maintaining it for months or sometimes years. But you have full control to change it if you don't like it. And if you make a mistake, you can fix it. And you know you're kind of playing your own sandbox. And then the final ring out is like, you know, intentionally throw a code where you're hacking up some script and you just try and get like, automated thing, and you don't care at all about it being anything more than the thing that solves your problem right now. And as soon as you're done, solving your problem gets thrown away.
So so I think it's It's good to think about software from that perspective because not everything has to be perfect.
But the things that have to be perfect are worth doing a lot of work to try to make sure they're perfect, even if the perfection is impossible. Definitely.
Um, so I think there's another big direction which I would love to see it when it's the right time, which is, um, Swift Inter operating with C plus plus, Um, but one of the big reasons to for swift interoperate with c++ so that we can eventually someday in a beautiful world, rewrite the swift compiler and swift itself.
And there's a few dependencies we need to get done, like sequel supposed Inter integration before you do that.
But I think this would be a huge thing because of allow
the Comparator community in itself to use Swift, which is good for the language evolution. But it also makes the compiler itself more accessible to swift developers.
See ya shove you ever really compatible Swift.
I know that I have. Yeah, that's interesting, because I did write a compiler in surfed, which could compound swift goat. Um, it's quite interesting because I was
reading a foreign post again.
Ah, and someone mentioned a link to commonly reject changes. I'm at another very bottom left off. The document is a is a question which basically asked if he surfed compiler would ever be written and swift. So I thought, Hey, that would be really cool, right? I mean, if if it if that was actually possible So so over the weekend, I just ended up writing my own a little black compiler which could, you know, compulsive code I s purely and served. It could do like, you know, the organization parsing and l A v m i r generation and outputting a binary everything. It's an unserved. Um,
it's just like it's just little fun Little project. But I also think it's a good start, a project for other developers who are not familiar with how compile a box.
So they could just, uh, you clone this project and just have a play
and try adding some new features to it. I think it would be a really good start, a project for people to, um learned compiler development.
That's really cool. And what's your project called?
It's called Little Swift. It's on my get up reported Tree. I forget but Link
Yeah, yeah, I think Harlan Haskins has done some work building L of'em wrappers for Swift and things like that. And Robert Wittman has also done some work, and I think it's it's really cool to experiment with that. And you know, you don't have to
thio implement a language is complicated too swift. To start with, you can start with something much simpler, and it's a great way to learn compilers. And
my sense is that swift is a good language for And compilers, do you agree with
that?
Um, I think so. Yeah. Um, I did find really easy to write one. I mean, I made it over a weekend, so I guess that's something.
Um And yet and
I think the library by Holland has Kinton. Robert, I think it's called L A V m surfed.
That's the one I use for my own compiler because it really helped me. Ah, simplify gold generation because I was actually trying to write it from scratch. Um, and, uh, that's when I discovered the slavery
and yet really helped.
It was super awesome. And that's one of the great things with stuff. Community is that there's so many different interests and different talented people working on different things. You can usually find something to build on and and or other like minded people who work with on a common project.
All right, um,
so I think that kind of about closes out. Most of the stuff we were thinking about talking about
gynecomastia swift development, compiler violence. Specifically, um,
w W D c. Is coming up, and there's an event called a conference called Try Swift on June 7th, which I think I've been, which I'm not particularly from familiar with. But
I think it helps people make their first polar quest to Swift and helps them get in, get ah,
acclimated to the hole too swift as a whole and also the compiler itself. I think so. You actually knew a little more.
Yeah, I think pass comment commented on Ah, poor request for this
proposal. Like this podcast. I had no idea about it, but it just look really interesting. I'm I would love to organize an event like this in London,
so So I went to the event last year. It's a great way to get
involved in this stuff community. It's co located with WNBC in San Jose this year. Um, and I think that the focus is far as I know is to help people get over that that first hurdle and get working with this one compiler. The Swift projects with packs manager, like all the different parts of the swift ecosystem and get that first pull request in. And I think the event is organized by Natasha, the robot who is a really, really awesome
IOS developer and just generally great personal role. And she organized the event last year as well.
She has a team of people helping, right? I am sure. But it was It was a great event.
It sounds really awesome. And if I if I was able to go to Santa's, I would definitely go.
Yeah, yeah. I think that the registration is free or cheap, so it's worth checking out. We can have a link to it as well.
All right, um, so I think it's about everything. Thank you. Toc ash and Chris for being involved in this podcast in this episode Particular
Yeah. Happy to help. It's great to be here. Thank you for planning it all.
Yes, it was great to be Ah, Doctor. Doctor, you guys. Um, yeah.
Um, so this is another one of the very community led episodes. Um, if you want to see how it was all done, you can go look at the U Conn issue 38 or pull request 58. Like to see all the conversations about how this happened, the outlines and stuff that week we put together to make this How make this all come together. It's actually not as dumb as daunting as you think it might be when you're first starting. So just go to the assist committee podcast Repo,
take a look at the poll requests
and that it can ask us any questions you want. Ah, you can reach out to me at Andrew Lincoln on Twitter. If you wanna learn more about how is done if you want to make an episode yourself.
Eso Thank you for listening and we'll see in the next episode Say bye, guys.
Bye. Awesome. Thank you.